# C# 2

## Generics

Generics allow us to write general-purpose code thats type-safe (compiler validates the types) at compile-time using the same type in multiple places without knowing what that type is beforehand.

They are most heavily used in:

* Collections
* Delegates, particularly in LINQ
* Asynchronous code, ```Task<T>``` is a promise of a future value of type ```T```
* Nullable value types

### Collections before generics

.NET 1 had three broad kinds of collections:

* Arrays -> direct language and runtime support, size is fixed at initialization
* Object-based collections -> Values are described in the API by using System.Object, no collection-specific language or runtime support, but language features such as indexers and ```foreach``` statements can be used with them. Examples: ```ArrayList``` & ```Hashtable```.
* Specialized collections -> Values are described in the API with a specific type, and the collection can only be used for that type. Example: ```StringCollection``` -> API looks like ```ArrayList``` but using ```String``` instead of ```Object``` for anything referring to a value.

Arrays & specialized collections are **statically typed**. The API prevents us from putting the wrong kind of value in a collection.

**Example:**

Let's say we want to create a collection of strings in one method (GenerateNames), and print them out in another method (PrintNames).

Doing it with arrays:

```csharp
static string[] GenerateNames()
{
  string[] names = new string[4];
  names[0] = "Gamma";
  names[1] = "Vlissides";
  names[2] = "Johnson";
  names[3] = "Helm";
  return names;
}

static void PrintNames(string[] names)
{
  foreach (string name in names)
  {
    Console.WriteLine(name);
  }
}
```

This isn't ideal, because we have to know exactly how many names there will be. Either finding out before we create the array or always creating a bigger one and copying the contents of earlier smaller arrays.

A type that keeps track of the size is the ```ArrayList```.

```csharp
static ArrayList GenerateNames()
{
  ArrayList names = new ArrayList();
  names.Add("Gamma");
  names.Add("Vlissides");
  names.Add("Johnson");
  names.Add("Helm");
  return names;
}

static void PrintNames(ArrayList names)
{
  foreach (string name in names)
  {
    Console.WriteLine(name);
  }
}
```

While this is cleaner because we don't need to know the amount of names beforehand, the big problem is that there's nothing that stops us from adding a nonstring to the collection. The type of the ```ArrayList-Add``` parameter is just ```Object```.

Also, ```PrintNames``` can contain any kind of object reference. If we tried to print types that can't be printed we'd get an error, yet nothing checks whether the type is a correct one.

One way of solving this would be using a ```StringCollection```as the return type of the ```GenerateNames()``` method & taking a ```StringCollection``` parameter in ```PrintNames```.

This would solve the errors mentioned above and would be great if we would always need strings. But if we needed a collection of some other type we'd either have to find a suitable collection framework or write it ourselves.

### Using generics instead

```List<T>``` is a generic type. It is a collection in which ```T``` is the element type of the collection. Generics basically allow us to write classes or methods that can work with any data type.

```csharp
static List<string> GenerateNames()
{
  List<string> names = new List<string>();
  names.Add("Gamma");
  names.Add("Vlissides");
  names.Add("Johnson");
  names.Add("Helm");
  return names;
}

static void PrintNames(List<string> names)
{
  foreach (string name in names)
  {
    Console.WriteLine(name);
  }
}
```

This solves all the previous problems:

* We don't need to know the size of the collection beforehand
* We get a compile-time error if we try to use anything other than a ```List<string>```
* We can change the element type without having to worry about generating code and and having to manage it

#### Type parameters and type arguments

Parameter -> inputs declared by the method
Arguments -> are provided by calling code - in the form of arguments

```csharp
public static void Method(string name, int value) {} //string name & int value are parameters

Method(customerName, 5) //customername is the Argument for the "name" parameter
```

In generics, we have ```type parameters``` and ```type arguments``` - which are the same idea but applied to types. The declaration of a generic type or method includes type parameters in angle brackets after the name.

```csharp
public class List<T>  //T is the type parameter
{
  ...
}

List<String> list = new List<string>(); //<string> is the type argument
```

A list has an ```Add(T item)``` method. If we for example try to type "list.Add(" into Visual Studio, IntelliSense will prompt us as if the the ```item``` parameter has been declared with a type of string. If we try to pass an argument of another type, there will be a compile time error. 

Methods can be generic as well:

```csharp
public static List<T> CopyAtMost<T>(List<T> input, int maxElements){

//the method declares a type parameter T and uses it in parameters and return types

    int actualCount = Math.Min(input.Count, maxElements);
    List<T> ret = new List<T>(actualCount); //type parameter used in method body

    for (int i = 0; i < actualCount; i++)
    {
        ret.Add(input[i]);
    }

    return ret;
}

static void Main()
{
    List<int> numbers = new List<int>();
    numbers.Add(5);
    numbers.Add(10);
    numbers.Add(20);

    //call to the method using int as the type parameter
    List<int> firstTwo = CopyAtMost<int>(numbers, 2);   

    Console.WriteLine(firstTwo.Count);
}
```

This means we are able to use a type parameter to express a relationship between the types of regular parameters and the return type.

Generic types can use their type parameters as type arguments when declaring a base class or interface.

```csharp
public class List<T> : IEnumerable<T>
```

#### Arity of generic types and methods

Generic types or methods can declare multiple type parameters by separating them with commas within the angle brackets.

```csharp
public class Dictionary<Tkey, TValue>
```

The generic arity of a declaration is what makes it unique. 

```csharp
public void Method() {} //nongeneric method - generic arity 0
public void Method<T>() {}  //generic arity 1
public void Method<T1, T2>() {} //geeneric arity 2  
```

The types don't have to be the same kind, but usually are. Theoretically, these type declarations can all coexist in the same assebly:

```csharp
public enum IAmConfusing {}
public class IAmConfusing<T> {}
public struct IAmConfusing<T1, T2> {}
public delegate void IAmConfusing<T1, T2, T3> {}
public interface IAmConfusing<T1, T2, T3, T4> {}
```

Generic methods can also have the same name but a different generic arity. This is like creating overloads based on the **number** of type parameters. **Important:** Even though the generic arity keeps declarations separate, type parameters for methods *don't*.

For example, this won't work because we can't overload solely by type parameter name:

```csharp
public void Method<TFirst>() {}
public void Method<TSecond>() {}
```

We also can't give two type **parameters** in the same declaration the same name:

```csharp
public void Method<T, T>() {} //compile time error - duplicate type parameter T
```

However, two type **arguments** can be the same, for example a string-to-string mapping with:

```csharp
Dictionary<string, string>
```

### What can be generic?

`Enums` can't be generic. `Classes`, `structs`, `interfaces` and `delegates` can be. `Methods` and `nested types` can be generics, but all of the following have to be non-generic:

* `fields`
* `properties`
* `indexes`
* `constructors`
* `events`
* `finalizers`

```csharp
public class ValidatingList<TItem>
{
  private readonly List<TItem> items = new List<TItem>();
}
```

This uses the type parameter `TItem` as a type argument for `List<T>`, but that's a type parameter introduced **by the class declaration**, not by the field declaration.

### Type inference for type arguments to methods

Let's say we have a generic method like this:

```csharp
public static List<T> CopyAtMost<T>(List<T> input, int maxElements)
```

Instead of doing this:

```csharp
List<int> numbers = new LIst<int>();

List<int> firstTwo = CopyAtMost<int>(numbers, 2);
```

We don't have to actually specify the type argument in the source code, the compiler infers it for us based on the argument for the first parameter in the method.

```csharp
List<int> firstTwo = CopyAtMost(numbers, 2);
```

Type inference can only use the arguments you pass to a method, not what we do with the result. It also has to be complete, we either explicitly specify all the type arguments or none of them.

```csharp
public static Tuple<T1, T2> Create<T1, T2>(T1 item1, T2 item2)
{
  return new Tuple<T1, T2>(item1, item2);
}


//instead of this
new Tuple<int, string, int>(10, "x", 20)

//we can do this
Tuple,Create(10, "x", 20)
```

So far, all the type parameters could stand for any type. Sometimes we might want only certain types to be used as type arguments for a particular type parameter. This is what **type constraints** are for.

### Type constraints

Let's say we want to write a method that formats a list of items and ensures that we format them in a particular culture. The `Iformattable` interface provides a suitable `ToString(string, IFormatProvider)` method.

Now we want to express that the parameter is a list of some element type, where the element type implements the `IFormattable` interface. We can add this constraint like this:

```csharp
static void PrintItems<T>(List<T> items) where T : IFormattable
```

This doesn't just change which values can be passed to the method, it also changes what we can do with a value of type `T` within the method. The compiler knows that `T` implements `IFormattable` so the `ToString(string, IFormatProvider)` method can be called on any `T` value.

```csharp
static void PrintItems<T>(List<T> items) where T : IFormattable
{
  CultureInfo culture = CultureInfo.InvariantCulture;
  foreach (T item in items)
  {
    Console.WriteLine(item.ToString(null, culture));
  } 
}
```

Without the type constraint, the `ToString` call wouldn't compile.

Type constraints aren't limited to interfaces. They work with:

* Reference type constraint - `where T : class`
* Value type constraint - `where T : struct` (either a struct or an enum)
* Constructor constraint - `where T : new()` (the argument must have a public parameterless constructor)
* Conversion types - `where T : SomeType` SomeType can be a class, an interface or another type parameter.

One common form of constraint uses the type parameter in the constraint itself:

```csharp
public void Sort(List<T> items) where T : IComparable<T>
```

This allows our sorting method to compare elements from the items parameter pairwise using the `CompareTo` method from `IComparable<T>`.

### The default and typeof operators

The `default` operator returns the default value for the type that is passed into it - it has the same value as if we declared a field and didn't immediately assing a value to it. For reference tpyes, it's a null reference, for non-nullable types it's a 0 value (0, 0.0, ...).

It can be used with type parameters and with generic types. The type of the `default` operator is the tpye that's named inside it.

```csharp
public T LastOrDefault(IEnumerable<T> source)
{
  T ret = default(T);
  foreach (T item in source)
  {
    ret = item;
  }
  return ret;
}
```

The `typeof` oeprator is slightly more complex. Here are the main 4 use cases:

* No generics involved at all, for example `typeof(string)`
* Generics involved but no type paramters, for example `typeof(List<int>)`
* Just a type parameter, for example `typeof(T)`
* Using something like `typeof(List<TItem>)` within a generic method 
* Generics involved but no type arguments specified `typeof(List<>)`

